common-lisp/README.md, before:

REDUCE on Common Lisp
=====================

Francis Wright, March 2019

**This code is currently experimental!**

The files in this directory are intended to build and run the current distributed version of REDUCE on ANSI Common Lisp.  Some details depend on the implementation of Common Lisp but I try to keep these to a minimum.  At present, I support explicitly only the native Windows port of SBCL (Steel Bank Common Lisp), but in the longer term I plan to support also Ubuntu Linux and a couple of other implementations of Common Lisp, probably CLISP and GCL (GNU Common Lisp).

Building REDUCE
---------------

Create a build directory somewhere convenient.  If you download the whole [REDUCE trunk](https://sourceforge.net/p/reduce-algebra/code/HEAD/tree/trunk/) then you can use the common-lisp directory as your build directory if you want.

**You need the following software and files:**

An appropriate version of [SBCL](http://www.sbcl.org/).

A minimal Unix-like environment including `bash` and `grep`; I use [Cygwin](https://cygwin.com/).  (The `grep` command is used only for reporting an error summary, which could be commented out without affecting the build process.)

The build directory must contain the following files from the common-lisp directory:

* `sl-on-cl.lisp`
* `trace.lisp`
* `clprolo.red`
* `clrend.red`
* `build.red`
* `remake.red`
* `bootstrap.sh`
* `build.sh`

The build directory must also contain a link to or copy of the file [psl/boot.sl](https://sourceforge.net/p/reduce-algebra/code/HEAD/tree/trunk/psl/boot.sl), which is included in the [REDUCE trunk](https://sourceforge.net/p/reduce-algebra/code/HEAD/tree/trunk/) but not in binary distributions.  (The way to create a link in Windows is with the `mklink` command at a Windows command prompt; I use a symbolic link for `boot.sl`.  A Windows shortcut created using the File Explorer GUI will probably not work!)

The `packages` directory of the version of REDUCE you want to build must be available and the environment variable `$reduce` must be set to the directory containing this directory.  The `packages` directory is installed as part of a binary distribution so, for example, if you have a default REDUCE installation on Windows then an appropriate value for `$reduce` would be `"C:\Program Files\Reduce"` (in Windows format).  You can also use a recent download from the [Subversion repository](https://sourceforge.net/p/reduce-algebra/code/HEAD/tree/trunk/).  If not set then `$reduce` defaults to the build directory, which is useful if you include a link to the `packages` directory you want to use.

Run `bash` and make your chosen build directory current.  Set the `$reduce` environment variable.  For example, execute the `bash` command

	export reduce='C:/Program Files/Reduce'

Run the build script by executing the `bash` command

	./build.sh

The build process should create two sub-directories in the build directory called `fasl` and `log`.  The whole `log` directory and the `*.lisp`, `*.dat` and `bootstrap.img` files in the `fasl` directory could be deleted after the build; only the files `fasl/reduce.img` and `fasl/*.fasl` are required to run REDUCE.  (I will probably delete superfluous files automatically at some later date, but for now they are useful for debugging.)

Running REDUCE
--------------

REDUCE can be run by double-clicking the file `reduce.bat`, or from a Windows command prompt with the build directory current by executing the command

	reduce

At present, the current directory when REDUCE is run must be the build directory, but I will remove that restriction at some later date.

(Don't try to run Windows SBCL interactively under `bash` because you'll probably find that input editing doesn't work as you would wish; fortunately, it runs fine in batch mode under `bash`.)

Interrupting REDUCE (with Control-C) invokes the SBCL debugger and aborting that enters Lisp, which is very useful for low-level debugging!  Evaluate `(begin)` to get back into REDUCE.

Implementation-specific functionality
-------------------------------------

The following facilities are modelled on those provided by PSL; please see the PSL manual for further details.

Lisp-level function tracing is provided by the commands `tr` and `trst` after running the command `lisp load trace;`.  (The `trace` module will eventually be autoloaded.)  A command of the form `tr fn1, fn2, ...;` (without any quotes) enables tracing of the argument and return values of each of the functions `fn1`, `fn2`, etc.; if no functions are specified it lists all traced functions.  The command `trst` is similarly but also traces assignments, which works for functions that have been compiled using `faslout` provided the appropriate Lisp file is still available in the `fasl` directory.  The commands `untr` and `untrst` (which is just a synonym for `untr`) disable tracing; if no functions are specified they untrace all traced functions.  These tracing commands are independent of the Common Lisp `trace` and `untrace` macros.  Input of function names uses Standard Lisp (i.e. REDUCE) syntax but output uses Common Lisp syntax, although it does not include any package prefixes, which can make Common Lisp tracing output of REDUCE incomprehensible!

A preliminary implementation of the `system` function is provided but only for Microsoft Windows at present.  The functions `getenv` and `getpid` respectively provide access to environment variables and the REDUCE process identifier, and should be portable across operating systems (but not yet Common Lisp implementations).

The functions `pwd` and `cd` respectively return and reset (and return) the current working directory.  (However, at present REDUCE will not be able to load compiled files if its current working directory is changed, so don't use `cd`!)

Environment variables, "." and ".." in filenames are expanded by `cd` and `open` relative to the current working directory of the REDUCE process.

Current status
--------------

The process described above should build all of REDUCE without any obvious errors.  So far, I have avoided the need to customise the main REDUCE source code.

All core test files run to completion and the output agrees with CSL except for timings and the following:

* `arith.tst` displays less numerical error;
* `rlisp88.tst` and `assist.tst` show insignificant implementation differences.

76% of the noncore test files produce output that agrees with CSL except for timings and minor numerical, letter case and/or implementation differences.  This includes the crack suite.  A big chunk of the noncore packages that do not yet run correctly consists of the redlog suite.

Timings
-------

I estimate that SBCL REDUCE is 3 or 4 times slower than PSL/CSL REDUCE, but note that it is currently built for comfort (of debugging) rather than speed!

Operation                               | CSL Time | Previous Time | Latest Time
----------------------------------------|----------|---------------|------------
Build bootstrap REDUCE image            |          | 3.8 secs      | 3.8 secs
Build final REDUCE image                |          | 0.5 secs      | 0.4 secs
Run alg.tst                             | 47 ms    | 297 ms        | 344 ms
Run (and check) all core test files     | 29 sec   | 155 secs      |  50 secs
Run (and check) most noncore test files |  5 min   |               |  17 min

The shorter times above are probably not very meaningful.  Most of the time building REDUCE goes in compiling the packages, which takes a couple of minutes, but I don't currently have any precise timings for this.  The CSL times do not include checking, which involves running `diff`.  The CL time for the noncore tests does not include all packages since some of the tests currently hang.

Known bugs
----------

By default, with `on defn` all output (including strings) will be lower case.  If you set `off printlower` then string case will be correct but all identifiers will be upper case.  This bug is a consequence of the fact that SL-on-CL is currently an upper-case lisp internally, whereas REDUCE assumes a lower-case lisp.  Input is up-cased when it is read and down-cased when it is printed, except for strings, for which character case is preserved.  However, in a few situations, strings are printed as a sequence of single-character identifiers, which are down-cased by default.  I have not found a solution to this bug, but it's essentially cosmetic and I don't suppose "on defn" is used a great deal.

To do
-----

In `rlisp/inter.red`, `*gc-hook*` is undefined.  It's called `sb-ext:*after-gc-hooks*` in SBCL, so this needs sorting out later.

In `alg/intro.red`, `outputhandler*` is undefined. Should be declared fluid. Done temporarily in `clrend`.

In `rlisp/io.red`, `in` uses `mkfil*` but `out` and `shut` use `mkfil`; why the inconsistency?  [Not currently a problem for me as far as I'm aware.]

Make faslout/faslend more robust by using a single function that calls begin internally (cf. infile) and make faslend generate a throw.  (See also the old mkfasl code?)

Turn on use of smacro/inline declarations in REDUCE (which I turned off to avoid a problem that is now fixed) and optimise SL-on-CL to improve its speed.

Better error handling.

Implement a proper Lisp init function and dump an executable file.

Replace shell scripts with Common Lisp code to build REDUCE portably?

Make SL-on-CL lower case and stop downcasing in the print functions.  (Internal functions could remain upper case.)  This would solve the problem that prettyprinted strings are downcased and avoid the need for a couple of ugly print-case related hacks.  With SBCL, this will probably cause problems with a few key symbols, such as NIL, T, LAMBDA, QUOTE, as it does with Emacs Lisp, so I'm not too eager to try it.  (Could translate nil to '().)  However, this should be straightforward with CLISP, which provides a lower-case "modern" version of Common Lisp.

Allow REDUCE to be run with a current directory other than the build directory.

Improve support for the noncore packages -- **work currently in progress**.

Commit message:

REDUCE on Common Lisp
Enable use of REDUCE inline functions, which did not work properly
until my previous check-in.  Now three more noncore package test files
run correctly and many test files run faster by a factor of up to
around two.

common-lisp/README.md, after:

REDUCE on Common Lisp
=====================

Francis Wright, April 2019

From the introductory chapter of [*Common Lisp the Language, 2nd edition,* by Guy L. Steele Jr.](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/Groups/AI/html/cltl/cltl2.html):

> The goals of Common Lisp are thus very close to those of Standard Lisp and Portable Standard Lisp. Common Lisp differs from Standard Lisp primarily in incorporating more features, including a richer and more complicated set of data types and more complex control structures.

**This code is currently experimental!**

The files in this directory are intended to build and run the current distributed version of REDUCE on ANSI Common Lisp.  Some details depend on the implementation of Common Lisp but I try to keep these to a minimum.  At present, I support explicitly only the native Windows port of SBCL (Steel Bank Common Lisp), but in the longer term I plan to support also Ubuntu Linux and a couple of other implementations of Common Lisp, probably CLISP and GCL (GNU Common Lisp).

Building REDUCE
---------------

Create a build directory somewhere convenient.  If you download the whole [REDUCE trunk](https://sourceforge.net/p/reduce-algebra/code/HEAD/tree/trunk/) then you can use the common-lisp directory as your build directory if you want.

**You need the following software and files:**

An appropriate version of [SBCL](http://www.sbcl.org/).

A minimal Unix-like environment including `bash` and `grep`; I use [Cygwin](https://cygwin.com/).  (The `grep` command is used only for reporting an error summary, which could be commented out without affecting the build process.)

The build directory must contain the following files from the common-lisp directory:

* `sl-on-cl.lisp`
* `trace.lisp`
* `clprolo.red`
* `clrend.red`
* `build.red`
* `remake.red`
* `bootstrap.sh`
* `build.sh`

The build directory must also contain a link to or copy of the file [psl/boot.sl](https://sourceforge.net/p/reduce-algebra/code/HEAD/tree/trunk/psl/boot.sl), which is included in the [REDUCE trunk](https://sourceforge.net/p/reduce-algebra/code/HEAD/tree/trunk/) but not in binary distributions.  (The way to create a link in Windows is with the `mklink` command at a Windows command prompt; I use a symbolic link for `boot.sl`.  A Windows shortcut created using the File Explorer GUI will probably not work!)

The `packages` directory of the version of REDUCE you want to build must be available and the environment variable `$reduce` must be set to the directory containing this directory.  The `packages` directory is installed as part of a binary distribution so, for example, if you have a default REDUCE installation on Windows then an appropriate value for `$reduce` would be `"C:\Program Files\Reduce"` (in Windows format).  You can also use a recent download from the [Subversion repository](https://sourceforge.net/p/reduce-algebra/code/HEAD/tree/trunk/).  If not set then `$reduce` defaults to the build directory, which is useful if you include a link to the `packages` directory you want to use.

Run `bash` and make your chosen build directory current.  Set the `$reduce` environment variable.  For example, execute the `bash` command

	export reduce='C:/Program Files/Reduce'

Run the build script by executing the `bash` command

	./build.sh

The build process should create two sub-directories in the build directory called `fasl` and `log`.  The whole `log` directory and the `*.lisp`, `*.dat` and `bootstrap.img` files in the `fasl` directory could be deleted after the build; only the files `fasl/reduce.img` and `fasl/*.fasl` are required to run REDUCE.  (I will probably delete superfluous files automatically at some later date, but for now they are useful for debugging.)

Running REDUCE
--------------

REDUCE can be run by double-clicking the file `reduce.bat`, or from a Windows command prompt with the build directory current by executing the command

	reduce

At present, the current directory when REDUCE is run must be the build directory, but I will remove that restriction at some later date.

(Don't try to run Windows SBCL interactively under `bash` because you'll probably find that input editing doesn't work as you would wish; fortunately, it runs fine in batch mode under `bash`.)

Interrupting REDUCE (with Control-C) invokes the SBCL debugger and aborting that enters Lisp, which is very useful for low-level debugging!  Evaluate `(begin)` to get back into REDUCE.

Implementation-specific functionality
-------------------------------------

The following facilities are modelled on those provided by PSL; please see the PSL manual for further details.

Lisp-level function tracing is provided by the commands `tr` and `trst`.  A command of the form `tr fn1, fn2, ...;` (without any quotes) enables tracing of the argument and return values of each of the functions `fn1`, `fn2`, etc.; if no functions are specified it lists all traced functions.  The command `trst` is similarly but also traces assignments, which works for functions that have been compiled using `faslout` provided the appropriate Lisp file is still available in the `fasl` directory.  The commands `untr` and `untrst` (which is just a synonym for `untr`) disable tracing; if no functions are specified they untrace all traced functions.  These tracing commands are independent of the Common Lisp `trace` and `untrace` macros.  Input of function names uses Standard Lisp (i.e. REDUCE) syntax but output uses Common Lisp syntax, although it does not include any package prefixes, which can make Common Lisp tracing output of REDUCE incomprehensible!

Preliminary implementations of the `system`, `pipe-open` and `channelflush` functions are provided but only for Microsoft Windows at present.  The functions `getenv` and `getpid` respectively provide access to environment variables and the REDUCE process identifier, and should be portable across operating systems (but not yet Common Lisp implementations).

The functions `pwd` and `cd` respectively return and reset (and return) the current working directory.  (However, at present REDUCE will not be able to load compiled files if its current working directory is changed, so don't use `cd`!)

Environment variables, "." and ".." in filenames are expanded by `cd` and `open` relative to the current working directory of the REDUCE process.

Current status
--------------

The process described above should build all of REDUCE without any obvious errors.  So far, I have avoided the need to customise the main REDUCE source code.

All core test files run to completion and the output agrees with CSL except for timings and the following:

* `arith.tst` displays less numerical error;
* `rlisp88.tst` and `assist.tst` show insignificant implementation differences.

78% of the noncore test files produce output that agrees with CSL except for timings and minor numerical, letter case and/or implementation differences.  This includes the crack suite and plotting packages.  A big chunk of the noncore packages that do not yet run correctly consists of the redlog suite.

Timings
-------

I estimate that SBCL REDUCE is 3 or 4 times slower than PSL/CSL REDUCE, but note that it is currently built for comfort (of debugging) rather than speed!

Operation                               | CSL Time | Previous Time | Latest Time
----------------------------------------|----------|---------------|------------
Build bootstrap REDUCE image            |          | 3.8 secs      | 4.1 secs
Build final REDUCE image                |          | 0.4 secs      | 0.4 secs
Run alg.tst                             | 47 ms    | 344 ms        | 282 ms
Run (and check) all core test files     | 29 secs  |  50 secs      |  50 secs
Run (and check) most noncore test files |  5 mins  |  17 mins      |  17 mins

The shorter times above are probably not very meaningful.  Most of the time building REDUCE goes in compiling the packages, which takes a couple of minutes, but I don't currently have any precise timings for this.  The CSL times do not include checking, which involves running `diff`.  The CL time for the noncore tests does not include all packages since some of the tests currently hang.

Known bugs
----------

By default, with `on defn` all output (including strings) will be lower case.  If you set `off printlower` then string case will be correct but all identifiers will be upper case.  This bug is a consequence of the fact that SL-on-CL is currently an upper-case lisp internally, whereas REDUCE assumes a lower-case lisp.  Input is up-cased when it is read and down-cased when it is printed, except for strings, for which character case is preserved.  However, in a few situations, strings are printed as a sequence of single-character identifiers, which are down-cased by default.  I have not found a solution to this bug, but it's essentially cosmetic and I don't suppose "on defn" is used a great deal.

PSL and CSL prettyprint _ without an escape (unless it appears alone), whereas CL REDUCE always prettyprints _ with an escape.  This appears to be because CL REDUCE uses "rprint/pretty.red", whereas PSL and CSL don't!

To do
-----

In `rlisp/inter.red`, `*gc-hook*` is undefined.  It's called `sb-ext:*after-gc-hooks*` in SBCL, so this needs sorting out later.

In `alg/intro.red`, `outputhandler*` is undefined. Should be declared fluid. Done temporarily in `clrend`.

In `rlisp/io.red`, `in` uses `mkfil*` but `out` and `shut` use `mkfil`; why the inconsistency?  [Not currently a problem for me as far as I'm aware.]

Make faslout/faslend more robust by using a single function that calls begin internally (cf. infile) and make faslend generate a throw.  (See also the old mkfasl code?)

Optimise SL-on-CL to improve its speed.

Better error handling.

Implement a proper Lisp init function and dump an executable file.

Replace shell scripts with Common Lisp code to build REDUCE portably?

Make SL-on-CL lower case and stop downcasing in the print functions.  (Internal functions could remain upper case.)  This would solve the problem that prettyprinted strings are downcased and avoid the need for a couple of ugly print-case related hacks.  With SBCL, this will probably cause problems with a few key symbols, such as NIL, T, LAMBDA, QUOTE, as it does with Emacs Lisp, so I'm not too eager to try it.  (Could translate nil to '().)  However, this should be straightforward with CLISP, which provides a lower-case "modern" version of Common Lisp.

Allow REDUCE to be run with a current directory other than the build directory.

Improve support for the noncore packages &ndash; **work currently in progress**.
